"Kuadinkro bessueba" ('The People of the Village Kuadinkro Want to Arrive'). Three flute players and a singer, recorded among the Atutu (Baule) by Hans Himmelheber in the village of Abigui, Ivory Coast, on January 27, 1935

The Heidelberg art ethnologist Hans Himmelheber visited the Baule people in central Ivory Coast for the second time in 1934/35 to write a monograph of their culture, after he had published a book on the role of the Baule sculptors in the previous year. For this planned "monograph about a tribe" all the important aspects of Baule life were systematically documented by him and his assistant Martin Lippmann through photos, interviews, and music recordings an ambitious undertaking for the then still young, independently-working ethnologists! Unfortunately, almost all of the descriptions (except those for a chapter on "religion") were destroyed in bombings in the war; the photo negatives, however, survived, and the sound recordings recently returned to the Berlin Phonogramm-Archiv of the Museum für Völkerkunde.

Hans Himmelheber, born in Karlsruhe in 1908 and a student of ethnology and art history in Munich and Berlin in 1931, realized that "Negro art" (Negerkunst) was accepted and respected in avant-garde circles. Fascinated by its formal and craft-like qualities, he wanted to know more about the art and its creators. He decided to find "Negro artists" ('Negerkiinstler') and to do his Ph.D. research "on the circumstances, under which African art is created, and how the African sees it himself." For this reason, he traveled to the Ivory Coast in the beginning of 1933, won the support of the French governor through a huge stroke of luck, and moved to the Baule, where at that time a large number of wood-carvers still practiced their craft. He was concerned with questions of choice of occupation, education, and working style of the wood cutters, their material and their techniques, and their attitude toward their crafts. A book on ''Negerkunstler - ethnographische Studien iiber die Schnitzkunstler bei den Stammen der Atutu und Guro" presented the results of these interviews that was far beyond its times in its kind of questioning. 

In 1934, he made a second trip to the Ivory Coast for about half a year together with the photographer Martin Lippmann. An anthropological monograph of the Baule culture was planned, based on interviews and collected ethnographical material,· but also on audio-visual documentation through photos and sound recordings, which was thoroughly "modern" for that time. Sound recordings were made for the Berlin Phonogramm-Archiv, detailed descriptions given for every item of the collection. The 65 wax cylinders, believed to be missing after 1945, have been back in the archive since 1991! Later, in a one-year field research in the Arctic, Hans Himmelheber investigated the "Eskimo artist" in a way that paralleled the research on the Baule. He traveled several more times to the Baule of the Ivory Coast in the period following the war, and researched and published in particular about masks, issues of portraiture, the gilding of prestige objects and the mouse oracle. 

