Fritz Bückner and Walter Konrad worked in the Lake Chad region to document selected craft techniques of the Buduma with a film camera for the IWF (Institut für den Wissenschaftlichen Film, Göttingen). The ship building of the Buduma (or Yedina, as they call themselves) attracted without a doubt their main attention. The Buduma were renowned far beyond the circle of researchers focussing on Africa for their papyrus boats: Thor Heyerdahl built his Ra I, that was supposed to cross the Atlantic Ocean from west to east in 1969, with the help of Buduma experts.
The Lake Chad has been a nerve center of central Africa since time immemorial. Even before the arrival of Islam in this area, the genealogists reported of the large kingdom of Kanem on the northeast coast of the Lake Chad. The continuous migratory movements of countless groups, who pressed into the Lake Chad area and/or were chased out and in the process made it to a "melting pot" as well as a "salad bowl," count among the determining factors in the over thousand years of
the kingdom's history, whose center shifted to the southwest coast of the lake, to Borno, between the 14th and 16th centuries due to the expansion of the Sahara. Besides the fusion of numerous ethnic groups, who presumably formed the contemporary Kanuri people in the 19th century, there are numerous ethnicities that were pushed into ecological niches, for example to the mountain regions south of the lake, the so-called Mandara Mountains, or to the more than 100 islands in the lake. Both regions proved to be unconquerable retreat areas of above all the Chad-speaking ethnicities, among which the Buduma, as described in the travel reports of Heinrich Barth and Gustav Nachtigal, were particularly feared for their ambushes.
Gustav Nachtiga's report recounts: "The safety of their difficult-to-access dwelling places, particularly in the direction of Borno, where they are separated from the mainland inhabitants by large, almost impassable water distances, has made the Buduma into unusually cheeky robbers. carry out successful surprise attacks not only against single travelers and small caravans, bu against whole villages. At high water, which allows them by night to slip unnoticed into the n vicinity of the coastal villages, the whole of the inhabitants sink into fear and concern of atta In the last days of December 1870, for example, a well-regarded village of the Schoa Datbigg ambushed; the males of the population were in part killed and the rest of the 142 people ( women and children) were dragged into slavery" (Nachtigal 1881:317).
At the time of the sound and film recordings of Walter Konrad, Nachtigal's descriptions be! to an almost forgotten history. The islands of Lake Chad have long been economically wor gether with the surrounding nations, as farm land for agricultural products and as a center of ing trade and smuggling. New communities have sprung up on the islands or spring up anev year with the subsiding water surfaces after the rainy season; these form a reflection of the social post-colonial situation of the states.
It is nevertheless the historic background, reported about by Nachtigal and other travelers, t harp players who Konrad documented (see also Konrad 1966) refer to. Themes of a past tir out in the texts, whose special meaning for the musicians and listeners has to be seen in the of the ensuing changes of the 20th century. Even if the Buduma did not remain the feared "r nor "kings of their islands," and the deer-raising has long since taken on the scale of an agri industry in northeast Nigeria, the images that let you believe in a past and with it mayt future-live on in the singing: xxx
It is a play of images and presumably also melodies; they point to a past, possibly even are it, but today are embedded with another meaning.