Carl Meinhof (1857-1944) is considered to be the founder of modern African linguistics. His early works on phonetics and a comparative grammar of the Bantu languages are still basic in African studies. Although Carl Meinhof's typological methods in language classification have been critisized, notably for their "evolutionary overtones" (Greenberg 1966:1), his contribution has stood the test of the times.

Meinhof, from 1919 on Professor Ordinarius for African languages at the University of Hamburg, was a person with wide interests and a diversified educational background, versatile in theology, German and Hebrew studies, African linguistics, oral literature, African religions, customary law, etc. He was a devoted field-worker and one of the first researchers who used the then novel technique of recording sound on wax cylinders during his stay in Tanganyika (then: German East Af-rica) in 1902-1903.

The 90 cylinder recordings left behind by Meinhof demonstrate his ramified interests. It is heartening for us a century later—to notice that hardly any aspect of the panorama of languages, oral literature and musical traditions in Tanganyika escaped his attention. although he stayed and recorded mainly on the coast, he also documented travelers and visitors from the interior speaking languages as far off the coast as Cinyanja and Luganda. He made recordings in dozens of local languages, even languages by foreigners such as the Gujara-speaking minority of immigrants in Dar es Salaam. He not only recorded samples of languages, greetings, and conversations, but many folktales, oral his-tory, Qur' an recitation, jokes, and a great variety of songs and musical instruments.

The present recording of a vilangwi 11-note xylophone (probably with a box-resonator), played by two performers is exceptionally clear. The tuning of the instrument is hexatonic (Meinhof himself confirms in his documentation that a 7th note of the scale is "missing.") Possibly it is one of those tunings, also current in southern Tanzania among the -Makonde and in northern Mozambique, that are derived from selective use of remote partials, e.g. 6 to 11 etc. (Kubik 1965, 1999). Meinhof writes that the 7th key is not in tune ("stimmt nicht" but that it is so deliberately ("Das muß so sein"). It is difficult to interpret this statement and also some others about the tuning.

The cylinder recording begins with the scale struck by one of the musicians. The irregular pattern seems to indicate that the layout was not scale-like. The second scalar pattern struck is in parallel fourths. Meinhof writes that he asked the performers to play the tones according to their own scalar conceptualization (".. wie sie von den Leuten selbst als Skala gespielt werden").

He recorded several pieces from these musicians. They are all in interlocking style, i.e. each performer plays at half the speed of the total auditory impression, because they combine their phrases and lines like a cog-wheel, falling between each other. The first piece is a particular surprise. The theme begins with a series of nine equispatial strokes by player I, but this motif continues in transposition one step down the scale to form the total basic theme of 18 strokes. At the end of this theme player II, sitting opposite player I, enters by striking his part between the notes of his part-ner. Interlocking in duple-division style such as here is common in the xylophone traditions of east Africa, from Uganda down to southern Tanzania and Mozambique. Meinhof also notes a teacher-learner relationship between his two Bondei musicians. He says that in one piece player II made a mistake and was reprimanded by his superior with a long "Ach!" Meinhof's vilangwi recording among the Bondei, a Bantu-language speaking group on the Kenya/Tanzania coast, linguistically classified as G.24 (Guthrie 1948), is a most welcome early document of a coastal east African xylophone style.

