Since American Indian songs were first recorded on cylinders by Dr. W. Fewkes in 1890, the phonograph has become an important tool of ethnomusicological research (Fewkes 1890a). American scholars, especially, have been successful in collecting valuable examples of primitive music from Indian reservations, thereby saving the music from extinction.

Since American Indian songs were first recorded on cylinders by Dr. W. Fewkes in 1890, the phonograph has become an important tool of ethnomusicological research (Fewkes 1890a). American scholars, especially, have been successful in collecting valuable examples of primitive music from Indian reservations, thereby saving the music from extinction.

The songs belong to the Thompson River Indians, a Salish tribe in the interior of British Columbia.

After transcribing the songs in the usual fashion, by ear, we analyzed the pitches tonometrically, in accordance with the procedure developed by Gilman (1892). On the assumption that all recordings tunings, also current in southern Tanzania among the -Makonde and in northern Mozambique, that are derived from selective use of remote partials, e.g. 6 to 11 etc. (Kubik 1965, 1999). Meinhof writes that the 7th key is not in tune ("stimmt nicht" but that it is so deliberately (Das mus so sein"). It is difficult to interpret this statement and also some others about the tuning.

The cylinder recording begins with the scale struck by one of the musicians. The irregular pattern seems to indicate that the layout was not scale-like. The second scalar pattern struck is in parallel fourths. Meinhof writes that he asked the performers to play the tones according to their own scalar conceptualization ("... wie sie von den Leuten selbst als Skala gespielt werden").

He recorded several pieces from these musicians. They are all in interlocking style, i.e. each performer plays at half the speed of the total auditory impression, because they combine their phrases and lines like a cog-wheel, falling between each other. The first piece is a particular surprise. The theme begins with a series of nine equispatial strokes by player I, but this motif continues in transposition one step down the scale to form the total basic theme of 18 strokes. At the end of this theme player II, sitting opposite player I, enters by striking his part between the notes of his part-ner. Interlocking in duple-division style such as here is common in the xylophone traditions of east Africa, from Uganda down to southern Tanzania and Mozambique. Meinhof also notes a teacher-learner relationship between his two Bondei musicians. He says that in one piece player II made a mistake and was reprimanded by his superior with a long "Ach!" Meinhof's vilangwi recording among the Bondei, a Bantu-language speaking group on the Kenya/Tanzania coast, linguistically classified as G.24 (Guthrie 1948), is a most welcome early document of a coastal east African xylophone style.