In 1955, the two ethnomusicologists Kurt Reinhard and Dieter Christensen traveled to Turkey to record and study the still-vibrant folk music tradition there. Shortly before the end of their trip, they learned that there was a camp with Turk immigrants from eastern Turkestan (Chinese Turkestan) in Istanbul. It was a good opportunity to record music, because up until that time very little music from the autonomous province of Xinjiang made it over the border. The Uigurs and Cossacks' who lived there were cut off from the outside world. In response to the researchers' question about how and why they came to Turkey, the informants answered: "We took off from Altai to Istanbul like birds." The reason for their emigration was the influx of numerous Chinese immigrants to eastern Turkestan, so that a portion of the Turk inhabitants escaped on economic and political grounds to the Soviet Union and further into Turkey.
For centuries, the homeland of the Turks was like a bridge between the cultures of the Middle East and East Asia. Many musical instruments also traveled from culture to culture along the Silk Roads that ran through east Turkestan. The end-blown flute zibizga', for example, made it into China in this way, as did long-necked lutes like the dombra, that was adopted by many cultures along the caravan routes. Even the Uigur music itself documents this mediating function between cultures, and elements and music of the Near East and East Asia are recognizable in it. The Chinese government used its entire influence to collect traditional music, rewrite it, and disseminate it again in another guise—in a form that spoke more to the political and aesthetic ideologies of the Han-Chi-nese. Many traditional elements were lost along the way. The small collection from the Istanbul camp in 1955 documents the music of eastern Turkestan in an earlier state.  session with the dombra player Toktagan
The collection consists equally of songs and instrumental pieces. Besides love songs, there are songs that praise heroes, reflect about life, or simply describe drinking horse milk on the alpine pasture.
In addition, the instrumental music, like what is heard on the dombra and the zibizga, has a descriptive and narrative character. It is fascinating how vivid these pieces, which are simple in to seem when they are played on the plain instruments for which they were intended.
Dombra and zibizga pieces are played at weddings and other parties. The long-necked lut did has a pear-shaped body that is flattened on the bottom. The neck has nine frets. Two metal sing are spanned along it that run to two frets. The dombra is tuned in fourths or fifths, dependne the melody. The strings are plucked with the fingers.
The piece called "The Prince" (Bi), with its very limited range of tones, contains melodic phone that the musician Toktagan played simultaneously with a drone produced on the deeperore string. During the recording, the people who were present danced in a very lively way.
The zibizga is an end-blown flute with an open end. Its wood is wrapped in string to strengthen de material and prevent tearing. The flute used in the musical example had three fingerin holes. Th player took the instrument between his lips and blew on it from the side; in other word
he held a little tipped to the side. While playing, he constantly moved his lower lip.
The instrumental piece "Moving Caravans" ('Kervan yörys") stems from the then-faous foll musician edey who brought it from his home in Bar Kol south of the Altai Mountail
Before Sarkat, the musician of this recording, blew into the zibizga, he sang a guttural drone an Ontin-ued to do so while blowing. He explained that "otherwise no melody would come out. cemed to be a way of thinking in multi-part sounds (drone-voice line). Maybe a fundamental music interest in and orientation toward polyphony led to a technique of simultaneous flute playi drone singing.
Notes 1 In the 1990s, seven million Vigurs and a million Cossacks lived in Xinjiang. In addition, half a million Uigurs lived in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.
2 The Uigur terms are presented here in the new-Uigur language— the same way that they were dictated by the people from eastern Turkestan.
3 In the literature this instrument is described as typically Cossack. It is written in various ways. Here we provide the spelling given to us by the musicians.