It seems that the word "ayarichi" was first mentioned by Ludovico Bertonio around 1612 in his
"Vocabulario de la Lengua Aymará." There it is described as an instrument which produces similar
"harmonies" (i.e., music) as are produced by organ pipes (" instrumento como organillos, que hazen armonia"). A few years later, Bernabe Cobo describes the ayarichi panpipe in his Historia del Nuevo Mundo" (around 1613-1653) as a musical instrument that the Indios use in their dances and whose seven pipes are aligned like those of the organ ("instrumento compuesto de siete flautillas, poca más o menos, puestas como canones de organos"). In ancient Peru, such panpipes were presumably played in connection with funerals and mourning ceremonies. It is presumed that the word ayarichi stems from the Quechua aya, or corpse. This characterizes the closeness of the dance to the remembrance of the deceased or those who have fallen in battle. Julia E. Fortún classified this dance for Bolivia as a danza de los muertos and described the formation of the dancers as the representation of a star (Fortún 1978).
The dance of the ayarichi is generally understood to be a religious expression in connection with the Andean world and its attachment to the earth. The ayarichi dance is particularly characteristic of the Bolivian region of Tarabuco (province of Yamparaéz in the department of Chuquisaca). On March 12, it is supposed to remind the people of Yamparaz of those who died in the battle of Jumbate, which took place in 1816. At that time, fights for independence took place in Chuquisaca in which Doña Juana Azurduy de Padilla heroically fought at the side of her Indian freedom fight-
Musician with a large ayarichi panpipe (jatun ayarichi) and a large drum (caja) from Candelaria, Cantón Illa,
province of Zudañez, department of Chuquisaca, Bolivia, Photo: M. P. Baumann, June 6, 1980.
ers Calisaya, Carrizo, and Miranda. In Candelaria, by contrast, ayarichi dancers perform only on Maria feast days to honor the Virgen de Guadalupe (September 8) and the Virgen del Rosario (Oc-tober 7).
The ayarichi instrumental ensemble generally consists of four panpipes and two large drums. Two men (guias) lead the dance and each beats on a large drum (caja) that is equipped with a snare.
While the two musicians beat the drums mostly in unison with the mallets in their right hands-once in a while they stagger the rhythm slightly— they each simultaneously play a double-rowed panpipe, the jatun ayarichi, which they hold in their left hands. Two additional men accompany them on two single-row panpipes that are only half as big, the small uña ayarichis. Two unmarried women (imillas) complete the ensemble as dancers and are encircled by the four musicians. The ayarichi dance is a simple, festive huayño. The narrow melody is very deliberate and ethereal and is made up of a few short phrases. The largest pipes of the jatun ayarichi are usually overblown (to the third partial) and thereby reach the range of the small panpipes, which themselves follow the main melody notes in parallel seconds.
The musicians are four farmers (campesinos) from Niagra near Icla, Cantón Icla-Lagunillas, Province of Zudañez, in the department of Chuquisaca, Bolivia. The first two musicians each play a large, double-rowed panpipe with seven pipes (jatun ayarichi) and simultaneously accompany themselves on a large drum (caja) with snares; the other two each blow into a smaller single-row panpipe with seven pipes (una ayarichi).