On a warm spring evening in the year 1956, the governor ("vali" of Antakya (southeast Turkey), Kurt Reinhard, and I were sitting at dinner and wondering what music one could document the next day. Suddenly, it occurred to the vali that he had heard much praise about a peasant who played the flute düdük. It was already late at night; nevertheless, we immediately set off and were soon standing at the low door of a loam house. After we had knocked for a long time, Mehmet Bayraktar opened the door groggy with sleep. His objection that he was not awake enough to be able to play something for us, was countered by the vali with the comment: "This professor has made a long, tiring journey from Germany so that he could get to know our music and listen to you play. You should be able to pull yourself together for that, right?"

In this night we recorded a series of songs and dances that Mehmet Bayraktar, a peasant of 55 years, had learned from his father. His father had still been a nomad. In spring, he had moved his herd of sheep up in the cool pastures of the mountains, and in fall down to the lowlands by the sea with their mild winter climate. Our host played on a duct flute düdük that you could buy anywhere and in any size at that time.

Sometimes musicians built their own düdük. Mehmet Bayraktar played on a recorder with seven finger holes and one thumb hole. He blew without stopping for breath: the technique of "circular breathing" allowed him to create a continuous stream of air into the instrument through a simulta-*neous inhale (through the nose) and exhale (through the mouth).

"Karakoyun" ('Black Sheep') is a real nomadic piece that was loved by all the herders and farmers, but also by the townsfolk. It belongs to the genre of instrumental narrative that used to be frequently performed on flute in Turkey, and is heard with increasing seldomness today. By contrast, among the Turk folks of Central Asia, the instrumental narratives have been preserved on a large scale. The narratives there, yet, are presented in a way that has more musical imagery than is the case in Turkey, where, on the other hand, instrumental improvisation is given more attention.

The content of the instrumental narrative given here is as follows:

Once upon a time there was a shepherd. He loved the daughter of a rich, respected man, an 'aga, who did not want to give him the girl as his wife, but also did not want to turn him coldly away. So he set up a condition, which he assumed, the boy would not be able to fulfill. The shepherd should lock up his sheep for a week, and should only let them lick salt, but should not lead them to water. And then, when he had let the herd free, he should succeed in preventing the sheep from running to the water, despite their great thirst. The young shepherd agreed to this condition, and when a week was up, he played such a lovely melody on his flute that the sheep stayed with him and listened. He had passed the test and received the daughter of the aga as his wife.

In this story there is still "a last rest of the original belief in the magical power of music, as the shepherds and the nomads (in their connectedness to nature) once possessed" (Reinhard 1975:124).