A Bedouin boy, recorded 1930 in Yemen. A treble voice clear as a bell casually singing a melody as ifthe boy just walked past us. His voice penetrates layer by layer through the centuries of old acoustic patina which settled over the wax cylinder recordings. Granular noise, the delicately melting rusting that gently crackles and densifies in waves until the song of the boy nearly disappears into it.
The melody shimmers through the billows of noise—comes and goes and soars on powerfully and finally terminates abruptly in the middle of the phrase at the physical end of the cylinder.
The noise describes a contour-rich surface and has at the same time a field of depth which opens the acoustic space. It urges me to think of the myriad stars which Hans Helfritz must have been confronted with on icy desert nights during his travel into the legendary desert city of Shabwa where he was the first white man to appear and enter. At this time he created sensation that would bring him to momentous worldwide fame. On the way through the desert, Helfritz, who had studied composition with Hindemith and comparative musicology under Hornbostel, unintendedly came across countless songs which he recorded with an Edison phonograph on wax cylinders and sent to the Phonogramm-Archiv in Berlin. One can hear from the collection of Helfritz that a musician was at work. His recordings reveal a keen sense for charismatic voices and interesting melo-dies. We do not know the names of the Bedouin boys who Helfritz recorded in Hadramaut-even Hanz Helfritz himself who in his own time had been a renown travel book author, filmmaker, explorer and composer—will hardly be remembered today.
He was one of the many discoveries that my duo-partner Eva Pöpplein and I had made as we, by the invitation of Oper Dynamo West, completed a research journey through the holdings of the Phonogramm-Archiv. We listened to over 600 wax cylinders in the following weeks from all corners of the earth. The musical content interested us as well as the quality of the static noise. A hun dred years of turbulent history have left their audible traces in the soft wax of the cylinders. What the scientist finds undesirable and seeks to reduce through digital de-noising programs, to a sound artist, is an infinite playing field of inspiration. In our work we pursued not only to curb the noise, we tried to treat the background noises and the melody both as acoustic evidence of the long-past lives to regard them equally and aesthetically unify them.
Noise belongs to our life. It is written into our deepest acoustic memory. And it is phenomenal hom varied and many-faceted the noise is which time has imprinted in the wax cylinders and the copper negatives. The Berlin Phonogramm-Archiv is home to not only one of the most significant ethnomusicological collections in the world, it conserves in its basement what is known to be the largest acoustic archive which has documented the noise of time.
Even after the premiere at HAU 3, the sound and songs of the wax cylinders have not let go of us. A
50-minute radio feature for the German radio where a composition of rolling sounds was interwoven followed. The work in 2011 was awarded the Prix Marulic. Based on the radiophonic composi-tion, a concert program came into being which we performed not only in various media and sound art festivals, but also in the Dahlem Ethnological Museum-to our great joy, at the home of the wax cylinders. Through its various metamorphoses and passages of time, this composition has now been documented on a CD which was released in the winter of 2013 on GRUENREKORDER and finally gives evidence to our artistic work with the historical wax cylinders of the Berlin Phonogramm-Archiv. We aim to make an acoustic bridge with our music into the 21st century.
Songs that have long faded away from the mouths that sang them shine through the dense layers of rich contour noise and touch the listeners' ear a hundred years after its recording. Our special thanks go to the women, men and children whose names we do not know but whose voices we can listen to in the historical wax cylinders of the Berlin Phonogramm-Archiv. It is a privilege to have been able to work with their music.