The upper foyer of the Dahlem Museum was brimming over; one squatted, sat and stood on the steps, on stools which had been brought in, and other make-shift means. Everywhere there were happily gesticulating Arab students, for whom the program consisted of soaking up some of the familiar folk atmosphere, and translating it into an ecstatically demonstrated ethnological self-image.
The Department of Ethnomusicology had invited two representative groups of Egyptian folk mu-sic. All of them ancestors of a certain Khufu-anch, court music director of the pharaohs, flute vir-tuoso, and singer. For the last 5,000 years, folk music in Egypt has been practiced by itinerant professional musicians; the art is passed on within the family and preserved. Doggedly, it defends itself against European influence, against the media and a commercialized way of practicing the arts, appears traditionally at weddings, plays at celebrations of the saints and circumcisions, to greet pilgrims and to accompany local village dance.
The one group from the south of Egypt is the "mizmar-baladi" ensemble. It consists of three oboes with narrower and wider bore that circle around the melody in a small tonal range and in heterophonic style. The meter that changes at intervals is given by two percussion instruments that give the beat in a surprisingly differentiated way, a large drum and a small kettledrum, which hangs in front of the body and is beaten in a virtuosic way with small sticks. Together with two stick danc-ers, the drum players perform dances in pantomime that are inspired by such folk subjects as the
"horse dance." For ears and eyes that have been schooled especially by the European concept of meticulous musical virtuosity, it is fascinating to experience art that arises out of an originally collective experience and sensation.
The second group on the program performed multi-part music. It is representative of the body of music that retreated to upper Egypt due to the growing influence of Islamization and later Europeanization in the north. It is characterized above all by the drone-like sustained notes and the burring and dinning sound of the double clarinet. The "rebabah," a spike fiddle with two strings, and an end-blown flute improvise to it. The rebabah player also sings popular traditional song-nar-ratives that treat subjects like the countryside, love, and nature. In addition, he sometimes supports rhythmically the duff and the tabla-both percussion instruments which testify to the close link with African off-beat rhythms-with virtuosic strikes of the bow. Newer pieces such as the imitation of an "airplane," which, however, retained something of the sound of the flight of the bee, were on the program. In sum, an exciting evening; spontaneous clapping along, cheers, understanding.
Folk art knows no brow-wrinkling misunderstanding, no first-must-get-it in order to be enjoyed And apparently no generational conflict, either, no shortage of new talent: the oldest player was 60, the youngest just turned 15 years old.
(from: "Der Tagesspiegel," Berlin, June 6, 1977)
(pp. 256-7:) Stick dancers and musicians of the mizmar-baladi ensemble during the concert