The Lithuanian single-pitch flute music represents a style that was documented in northeast Lithuania in a small territory on the Lithuanian-Latvian border mainly in the first half of the 20th century. It is certainly much older and once was much more widespread. Today this style only exists in the repertoire of the folk music revival movement.

The pieces are played on single-pitch flutes called skuduciai (sing. skudutis). A skuduciai set consists of four to eight flutes. The participants in an ensemble each use one to two instruments. The pipes (10 to 20 cm long) can be made of chervil, reed, or goutweed. Since, however, the soft stems of these plants quickly dry out and change tone, it is normal to make the pipes from wood: acorn, berry-bearing alder, ashwood, or, in the summer, garden willows.

Besides the skuduciai, the wooden trumpets called ragai and other wind instruments were played in northeast Lithuania in homogenous ensemble settings. The repertoire was very similar to that of the skuduciai. Both ragai and skuduciai were played outside, for example at the nightly grazing of the horses, at the shepherds' festival on Whitmonday, at the rye harvest, on the Midsummer's Feast, St. Peter's Day and so forth. In 1916, the collector Adolfas Sabaliauskas stated: "Today one plays the skuduciai standing, but once one also played them while walking." There was a special oral notation for the music of the skuduciai and the ragai: certain syllable combinations were used for instruction and memorization.

The music for single pitch flutes has some fundamental characteristics in common with the northeast Lithuanian vocal polyphony of the startines, a kind of Schwebungsdiaphonie; in particular the polyrhythmic organization, the harmony rich in seconds, and the use of a limited number of rhythmic values, usually only quavers and crotchets. In the written documentation about the two pieces presented here, there is a note that they represent songs played on skuduciai. The first piece possibly is a sutartine song performed instrumentally. But the second apparently used material of vocal origin only as a basis or source of inspiration. 

In the first piece, two musicians are to be heard. Each plays a pair of flutes. The recording consists of a total of 22 two-measure sections, whose content varies only in the two introductory sections and in the closing section: in the third section, the main version of the musical material appears that will be repeated without variation until the final section.'

The second piece is performed by three musicians. One plays two, the others each play one flute.

The recording consists of 18 sections, of which all but the final one are two measures long. There are four larger formal units (each comprising several sections). In the 1st to 4th section there is a two-measure phrase that is repeated four times without variation:

In the 5th to 11th sections, rhythmic variation takes place in the lower part, and rhythmic and melodic variation in the upper part. The middle part stays unchanged. Besides the two-part harmonies there are sporadic harmonies made up of three tones: 

The following sections (12th to 14th) are unvaried again, in the 15th. to 18th sections the variation sets in again. The hocket principle, the complementary rhythmic interrelation of parts, is more strongly seen here than in the first piece.

The two recordings were made in 1909 in the parish Juzintai in northeast Lithuania by Eduard Wolter (1856-1941): linguist, folklorist, ethnographer and historian of literature, author of numerous studies on the Lithuanian language and mythology and on the Lithuanian and Latvian folk-lore.

1 While listening to the music and reading the transcriptions, one has to take into account that there are pitch deviations up to 30 cents that influence the character of the interval.