In 1907, contact developed between Erich Moritz von Hornbostel and Friedrich Weiss, living in China, and at that time still a translator (later consul) in the consular service in Chengdu and Chongqing (province of Sichuan). Weiss expressed an interest in the possibility of making recordings for the Berlin Phonogramm-Archiv, and with the participation of his wife Hedwig, the collections "West China 1912" (9 wax cylinders) and "South China 1913/14" (40 wax cylinders) came into being in the following years, followed by another collection in the 1920s called "Aysnia" with 35 wax cylinders. 

It can be surmised from letters that Weiss wrote to Berlin that his efforts with regard to phonographical recording were ill-fated at the beginning: In June 1909, he complained about a phonograph that was functionally defect (whether this was repaired or a new one was sent from Berlin is unclear). In May 1912, he reported having sent the first shipment of recordings, but three months later he relates in a further letter that he is "somewhat unsettled by the whereabouts of the shipment." For good reason, because in September he finds out that in fact none of the wax cylinders had arrived in Berlin. Inquiries with the shipping agent seem to be fruitless, because on August 16, 1913, Weiss writes: "The songs of the boat's crew from 1911 seem to have been hopelessly lost. I recorded 7 new roles, and will bring them next year myself, since after this experience I would rather not put them in anyone else's trust." And on January 17, 1914: "I hope that you have now finally come into possession of the phonographical recordings of rowing songs, which were entrusted this time to the care of an especially reliable party with whom we are friends." 

These "rowing songs" and "songs of the boat's crew" are a kind of work song called laodong haozi, the third group of Chinese folk songs after the "mountain songs" (shange) and the "small melodies" {xiaodiao). 

Weiss' collection of haozi in "West China" contains singing of the boatsmen who used to row or tow the boats through difficult passages. Often they could only progress on very narrow paths in steep cliff walls. The work was not only extremely hard, but also dangerous, particularly on the Yangzi, with its deep gorges and threatening rapids.

While the first (lost) phonograms were recorded on the Weiss couple's Yangzi trip to Chongqing, the place of origin and circumstances of these recordings are not totally clear. It can be presumed, however, that Weiss again asked the men to his house to sing, since recording while working would not have been possible.

