In 1926, Edward E. Evans-Pritchard first traveled to southwestern Sudan to carry out

fieldwork among the Azande, in order to continue the ethnographical survey of the southern Sudan begun by C. G. Seligman. Two years later, prior to a second stay among the Azande, and on the advice of Seligman, he requested, and received, from Erich M. von Hornbostel an Edison phonograph in order to record Zande songs. Thanks to this equipment, he was able to record a total of 86 cylinders, 39 of which were of narratives (on such topics as circumcision and adultery cases), and 47 of songs, mostly solo (i.e. dance songs, war songs, beer songs). The cylinders themselves were sent to Berlin and copies were sent to the School of Oriental Studies in London.

fieldwork among the Azande, in order to continue the ethnographical survey of the southern Sudan begun by C. G. Seligman. Two years later, prior to a second stay among the Azande, and on the advice of Seligman, he requested, and received, from Erich M. von Hornbostel an Edison phonograph in order to record Zande songs. Thanks to this equipment, he was able to record a total of 86 cylinders, 39 of which were of narratives (on such topics as circumcision and adultery cases), and 47 of songs, mostly solo (i.e. dance songs, war songs, beer songs). The cylinders themselves were sent to Berlin and copies were sent to the School of Oriental Studies in London.

The cylinder selected for this CD, number 28, consists of two songs which are examples of the

"recitativo" style, with the lyrics hovering on a few key pitches of the pentatonic scale. For example, the first song consists of 17 very similar phrases of more or less equal length, each ending in the same refrain. The beginning of each phrase varies melodically in keeping with the tones of the lyr-ics. Though the lyrics are difficult to transcribe due to the poor sound quality, the verses mention the names of several Zande princes of Gbudwe's kingdom (Gbudwe, Rikita, Gangura, and possibly Mboli). The first song seems to mourn the death of the kings, while the second tells of their glorious feats. For example, one of the verses sings something like this: i na rúngá kù uro y... Rikìtà mạngi pái tò.

They are suffering to the east ... Rikita is causing them trouble.

The cylinders have not yet been even partially exploited; it is hoped that this CD and catalogue will stir up interest in these extremely valuable recordings, and that the contents of all the cylinders will soon be revealed and appreciated.

