The Cameroon grassland lies in the highlands of central Cameroon; moderate climatic conditions reign. The contrast to the humid-hot rain forest areas of the south are not only great as far as the environment and the climate are concerned: also the cultural and political areas developed differently in these two regions: The grassland was populated two or three centuries ago by groups from east Cameroon, who set up small kingdoms. In the rain forest area of the south, people organized themselves into small societies without an extensive political ruling body.

The political hierarchy of the grassland kingdoms also finds expressions in the artistic canon. Large ivory tusks that are fashioned into trumpets are, like the leopard skins, signs of royal power. The kings, however, shared their power with a secret society, which was established first and foremost by the leading representatives of the most important families of the kingdom.

The lela celebration in Bali is closely linked with the kingdom. Members of the royal family direct the course of the celebrations. The four holy lela flutes which are heard in the present recording were played by high dignitaries of the Bali kingdom when the German ethnologist Bernhard Ankermann traveled to the Cameroon grassland between 1907 and 1909. Ankermann estimated the population count in Bali at the time of his residence to be 8,000 people. He acquired a total of 1,700 ethnographic objects from the Cameroon grassland for the Museum für Völkerkunde in Ber-lin. He also recorded music on 55 wax cylinders- particularly sound examples from the kingdoms of Bali and Bamum. The lela flute-playing can be heard on six of these cylinders. One of Ankermann's photos shows four musicians who play on lela flutes and are recognizable by their clothing as members of the upper class of the society.

Ankermann gave in-depth descriptions in his journal of the place where the celebration was held and the course of events during the four days of celebrations: The center of the village is the market square in front of the entrance to the chief's residence. The gatherings of the men, where public affairs are discussed, take place here, as do the large official dances; in fact, everything that belongs to the public sphere (Ankermann 1959:303).

The main celebration in Bali, the lela celebration, which takes place at the beginning of the dry season, around December, is inaugurated with a solemn sacrifice that is brought for the spirits of the ancestors of the chief. At the same time, it apparently indicates the beginning of the regular military expeditions and raids that naturally took place primarily in the dry season; and therefore it also has a warlike character on the surface. All the men appear with weapons and explode an unbelievable amount of powder (ditto, 297).

It was exactly these appearances of the military societies, their songs, dances, and spectacularly performed mock attacks, that impressed foreign visitors. Even the king himself spent some time among the musicians. On the last day, it is reported,

the King stepped forward, spoke a few words and went to the stone heap where a few drummers sat down. The king himself and three dignitaries blew on the flutes; across from him danced a single woman, another carried his train. Around them all the warriors and women danced and sang. The soldiers stood at the other end of the square and shot [into the air]. That was the end (ditto, 265).

The lela celebration still takes place in Bali. The photo and sound documentation of the ethnologist Hans-Joachim Koloß of the Museum für Völkerkunde in Berlin' who visited the grassland more than 70 years later, clearly shows that one of the central institutions of the Bali society has survived the turn of the times almost unchanged.